['Official figures released at midday on Saturday put the total number of deaths in Spain from the coronavirus pandemic at 1,350, with infections nearly at 25,000. Of these, 1,612 patients were in intensive care, while 2,125 had recovered and had been discharged from hospital. The Madrid region, which has been the hardest hit in Spain so far by the outbreak, registered 176 deaths in just 24 hours, bringing the total to 804, which is 60% of the total in the country. The region has also seen 1,756 new infections in a day, raising the total to 8,921. Of these 767 patients are in intensive care. There were also 14 new deaths in the Basque Country, bringing the total in the northern Spanish region to 85. There have also been 260 new infections registered in the area, bringing the total to 1,725, of whom 648 are currently hospitalized. The regions of Aragón and Castilla-La Mancha have both opted to move seniors with the coronavirus together, to avoid further contagion in care homes. In Aragón, seniors who do not require hospital treatment will be moved to one of three care homes, one in each of the region’s provinces. Staff in these residences will be treated like essential health personnel, and will be given the same protective materials as hospital staff. The Official Association of Psychologists in Madrid has put a service into action to offer help to families who are grieving for loved ones they have lost to Covid-19. “The death of a loved one is a particularly hard and painful event, one that we normally go through without the need for professional psychological support,” a statement from the association read, adding that in the case of a death from the coronavirus, the pain of losing a loved one is combined with the difficulty of not being able to properly say goodbye. The lockdown in Spain has also had the undesired effect of confining domestic violence victims with their aggressors, reports Elsa García de Blas. The feminist association Femen warned that these women “are facing two pandemics: Covid-19, and sexist violence.” Abuse, the experts say, is heightened in a context where victims and their assailants cannot leave the house apart from for essential tasks, because there are more hours spent together, with no interruptions from daily routines. “Abusers have a sense of impunity and security, because the lockdown makes it difficult to get out of the relationship or to file a police report,” explained Miguel Lorente, a former government chief in the fight against domestic violence. On the roads, Spain’s DGT traffic authority on Saturday established a series of checkpoints on freeways leading out of major cities in a bid to stop people trying to reach their second homes in other parts of the country. The number of car journeys has steadily fallen this week as a consequence of the state of alarm in Spain, but there were fears that there would be a spike in journeys as Spaniards tried to reach their second homes – something that could spread the coronavirus to other parts of the country. Meanwhile, the Interior Ministry has opted to extend the validity of driving licenses that are due to expire during the current state of alarm, for a period of up to 60 days from their end date. In Madrid, the Ifema convention center has been converted into a temporary field hospital, which will count on 5,500 ordinary hospital and intensive-care beds. An emergency shelter for the homeless has already been set up in Ifema, which is located in the northeast of the country. Two hotels in Madrid have also been converted into hospitals, and will be used to treat coronavirus patients with mild symptoms. The Spanish Foreign Ministry is trying to manage the return of more than 4,000 Spaniards who have been left stranded abroad due to the coronavirus pandemic. Of these, nearly a thousand managed to get home by Friday night. The Philippines, Peru and Ecuador are among the areas where most Spaniards are located abroad, and where the most efforts are being directed. The Foreign Ministry has encouraged the more than 35,000 Spanish citizens who are currently in the United States, Brazil, Mexico, Cuba, Costa Rica and Thailand to return home as soon as they can. English version by Simon Hunter. ', '“I lost my mother and my father in 15 days,” a 50-year-old woman manages to utter, as she sobs uncontrollably in the parking lot outside the emergency room at the Txagorritxu hospital, in Vitoria, northern Spain. Her father, Vidal, she explains, died a few hours ago having contracted the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. He picked it up, she says, inside the hospital while he was with his wife, who died on March 3 from a heart problem. It’s 9pm and the woman doesn’t want to move from the parking lot, because from there she can see the hearse that will take her father’s body away. She was unable to say goodbye to him. She waves farewell. “I’ve been left without parents in 15 days,” she says. The Txagorritxu hospital is where half of the Covid-19 patients are being treated in the Basque Country region. The emergency room is one of the places where the coronavirus crisis is being played out in the Álava province. In it, 224 patients of the total 550 in the region are being treated. Among them, are 28 of the 53 patients who have required intensive care. Ambulances bringing patients to the emergency room sometimes pass the funeral cars taking away the bodies in the tunnel that leads to the building. Faces wracked with pain and fear are seen in equal measure. This is where children are crying for their parents and grandchildren for their grandparents. “They can’t even go into the chapel to pray,” says a member of the security team. “They have told me that they’ve turned it into an area where they can put patients.” At around 9pm on Thursday, three ambulances arrive all at once. The staff that attend to them, who are wearing full protective suits, are seeing the number of cases that they are taking into the hospital rise in double-digit percentages. Of the 470 beds in Txagorritxu, around 270 are occupied by coronavirus patients, with a worrying rise in people who require an artificial respirator, explain sources from the hospital. The rest of the beds are occupied with patients who have cancer or heart conditions. To make room for the rising number of cases, the hospital has taken 200 beds to the building usually used for consults, and is working as a network with other nearby centers, allowing for the transfer of patients with other issues to private hospitals such as the nearby Quirón, as well as public centers such as the Eibar hospital. But this doesn’t seem to be enough, and beds are being installed wherever possible, including the floor usually dedicated to clinical trials. “It’s a desperate situation,” explains a doctor on Thursday. “We have a colleague, a porter, who has been on a respirator for 11 days.” Her condition is not improving. Txagorritxu was the first site of an outbreak of the virus in Ávala. A chain of infections among health workers aggravated the situation, until many of them were forced to go into quarantine. The lack of health professionals is being alleviated thanks to the solidarity of and huge efforts being made by the personnel currently combatting the virus, albeit, they complain, with a certain lack of protective material and resources. “The physical effort is huge, and in addition there is the emotional effort of seeing colleagues who go and hide so they can cry and then come back to work, as well as the fear, which we are dealing with as best we can,” say medical sources. Infection tests in Txagorrixu are carried out twice a day, and the results take four hours to come back. Those who are diagnosed as having the coronavirus are taken alone into the hospital, into isolation. Once there, there are no friends or relatives to keep watch over them. The healthcare teams become their only family. English version by Simon Hunter.  ', 'Spaniard Juan Andrés explains that he is currently working 18 hours a day so that we can all hug our parents once more as soon as possible. The mother and father of this Madrileño, who are in their eighties, are currently on lockdown in their home in the Spanish capital, the city that has become one of the epicenters of the global coronavirus pandemic, one that threatens to cripple the health systems of all countries in a domino effect. Andrés, who was born in 1964, has lived in the United States for 30 years. He’s the senior vice president for technical development at Moderna Therapeutics, a biotechnology company that has come up with the first candidate for a vaccine for the SARS-CoV-2 virus in record time. This is an unprecedented scientific race. A report from Imperial College London has warned that social-distancing measures will have to stay in place if the world is to avoid millions of deaths, until a vaccination arrives within 12 to 18 months. In self-isolation with his family in his home in Boston, Andrés is fighting to defy even the most optimistic calculations. On January 13, when you could still walk the streets hand in hand with another person, his team received the genetic code of a new coronavirus that was starting to cause the deaths of workers at a live animal market in the Chinese city of Wuhan. By February 7, Moderna Therapeutics already had its candidate for a vaccine ready. On Monday, March 16, after skipping the usual tests on animals, a clinical trial on human volunteers got underway in collaboration with the US National Health Institutes. Andrés conveys a message of optimism: “We are going to succeed.” Question. How do you work with this responsibility? Answer. With huge amounts of motivation. I’m seeing close up the drama that is playing out in Spain. My parents and four siblings are in Madrid. It’s important that people know that there are other people working very, very, very hard to be able to create the vaccine as soon as possible. We can’t yet commit to dates or quantities, but we can assure you that we are all involved in this, working 18 hours a day. We’re only stopping to sleep. We’re buying equipment, getting ahead of ourselves as much as possible. And we are taking all the measures we can to [avoid the infection] of the people that have to go to our factories. Q. The fear is that we will not be able to hug our parents or grandparents again until there is a vaccine. A. Exactly. I have great hopes that in the summer, the infectiousness of the virus will fall, but we don’t know what is going to happen. Our motivation is to go as quickly as possible so we can hug each other again. Q. A vaccine won’t exist within a year. A. I don’t think so. The issue with vaccines, above all in pandemics, is the quantity that you can get ready. How many people are going to be able to be vaccinated? The experts say that there are risk groups, in particular seniors and the people on the front line in hospitals. Possibly it is them, and people who are dedicated to activities with social contact, who will be the first candidates to receive the vaccination. When it’s ready, we’ll have to manage the available quantities to take them to the places where they are most needed, but that is not our job. That will be the job of the governments and the authorities when the vaccine becomes available. And that will not happen for months yet. Q. The Imperial College report spoke of between 12 and 18 months. A. We don’t know yet if it will be 12 months or 18. We’ll have to see what happens. Some of the best news is the fact that China is treating this like a personal thing, because it has been the place where the global outbreak started. They are exporting masks and helping, there is huge social awareness. And they are also entering the battle to get the vaccine, not just for their use, but for the whole world. There are a lot of us in this fight. We are working on the assumption that we are going to be the first and wanting to be the first. And we are delighted to be competing with whoever else, because that means that, between us all, we will have more chances of getting a vaccine in time. Q. What are the next steps? A. We have entered into phase 1 [the first stage of a clinical trial, to adjust the dosage and to rule out possible serious side effects], with volunteers. Obviously, vaccinations are only tested on healthy volunteers, because they are a preventive treatment. Until we have the data, we will not know what the necessary dosage is, and we will not be able to calculate the time that will be needed. What we are trying to do is get as far ahead of ourselves as possible. Normally, when you are in phase 1, you don’t start to produce for phase 2 of the trials. I’m already producing for phase 2 [the second phase of the trials, in which the efficiency of the vaccine is tested with more volunteers]. I’m already getting ready to produce in the biggest quantities that we can. The second question is, how many doses are we going to be able to make? Well I don’t know, because I still don’t know what the dosage will be. The capacity will be five times greater or five times smaller if this works with a dose of 50 micrograms or if you need 250 micrograms. This is going to dictate when the vaccination will be possible. We are making an effort that is beyond superhuman, to get there as soon as possible. Q. With the H1N1 flu pandemic in 2009, rich countries started to monopolize the existence of vaccinations. Will there be an attempt to avoid that on this occasion? A. We cannot get involved there. The only thing that we can do is to place ourselves in the hands of the authorities and do our job. We are in the scientific part, and can do the clinical trials as soon as we can. This is a race against the clock. This is an abridged version of the original interview in Spanish. English version by Simon Hunter. ', 'Doctors in Spain are preparing to make difficult decisions as the number of coronavirus patients in intensive care continues to rise. Hospitals in hard-hit regions such as Madrid are quickly reaching capacity while the number of cases keeps growing and officials warn that “the worst is yet to come.” By Friday afternoon, Spain had registered 1,002 deaths, a 30% rise from 24 hours earlier. And the number of people in intensive care had grown by 21.5%, for a total of 1,141 patients. These two indicators are particularly relevant in tracking the spread of the disease, because the actual number of cases “is very likely” higher than what is officially reported due to a lack of testing, said Fernando Simón, the head of the Health Ministry’s Coordination Center for Health Emergencies and Alerts, and one of the most visible faces of the crisis-management effort. With nearly 20,000 reported cases, Spain is close to taking third spot on the global list of coronavirus infections. Of these, half have been hospitalized and 1,585 have been discharged following recovery. But with numbers expected to climb even higher in the coming days, government and health officials are preparing to see overwhelmed healthcare facilities. “The worst days are coming,” warned Health Minister Salvador Illa on Friday, admitting that he did not know whether Spain’s aggressive measures to contain the coronavirus – the country has been on lockdown since Saturday of last week – will be effective. “We need to manage it, and we need to manage it as soon as possible,” added Simón. “The impact this is having on our society is not tenable for very long.” In places such as Madrid, which accounts for most of the deaths in Spain, critical-care physicians are preparing to make difficult choices if there is a shortage of intensive care beds. The Spanish Society of Critical Intensive Care Medicine and Coronary Units (Semicyuc) has drafted an ethical guide to help doctors make those decisions. The text recommends that, given two patients, priority should be given to the one with the greatest life expectancy taking into account quality-of-life considerations. Neither this document nor the contingency plan drawn up by the heads of intensive care units (ICU) at Spain’s hospitals mention any criteria of age. Instead, the ethical guide says that “chronological age (in years) should not be the only element to consider in assignation strategies.” Fernando Simón said that there are around 4,400 critical care beds in Spain and that “they already had restrictive criteria” as to who may be admitted, but “much more slack than what they have now.” Because of the rise in the pace of hospital admissions, these criteria “have to become more restrictive.” Simón added that the Health Ministry is working on “establishing algorithms or admission criteria that are as homogeneous as possible.” The Madrid regional government and the Health Ministry on Friday said that a field hospital with 5,500 beds is being created inside Ifema, the city’s trade fair and exhibition facility, with support from the Military Emergency Unit (UME). Authorities have also erected an emergency shelter for homeless people at Ifema. Two hotels, the Ayre Gran Hotel Colón and the Marriot Auditorium, have already been converted into emergency wards for people with mild symptoms. Over 40 hotels in Madrid have offered their facilities, with room for nearly 9,000 people, according to the Madrid Hotel Industry Association. Field hospitals are also being erected elsewhere in Spain, even in areas without a significant amount of reported cases such as the Valencia region, in preparation for what could come. The Civil Guard has warned citizens not to attempt leaving for a weekend break, as it would violate lockdown rules. “Don’t go to your holiday residence this weekend. We will set up checks on roads and public spaces to ensure that restrictions are observed, and violators will be fined,” warned the law-enforcement agency on Twitter. The Civil Guard also reported that crime has been reduced by 50% since the stay-at-home orders went into effect, and that arrests have dropped by 60%. However, 75 people were arrested on Thursday for disobeying the state of alarm declared a week ago. Although opposition parties have mostly rallied behind Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez in the fight against the coronavirus, a growing number of regional leaders are criticizing the decision to centralize the purchase of critical health equipment, which is running low in many health centers. And Pablo Casado, head of the main opposition Popular Party (PP), demanded more tests and harmonized criteria to determine the real number of cases. Casado also claimed that the recent peak in cases “unfortunately coincide with the peak of the massive demonstrations on March 8 [for Women’s Day]. Sadly, we see now that it was irresponsible to participate in these marches.” English version by Susana Urra.', 'The Catalan premier, Quim Torra, on Thursday suggested in a BBC interview that the Spanish government is not implementing its own lockdown orders to deal with the coronavirus crisis. The separatist leader also said that the Spanish executive has left him without the necessary powers to combat the pandemic in his region. Following a string of critical comments from government officials about his “misrepresentation of the truth,” Torra on Friday said that his statements on the BBC had been “poorly translated” and that when he asked for the confinement of citizens, he was in fact requesting stricter measures than those already decreed by the Spanish government. As an example, he said that “only people who work in essential services” should be allowed out of their homes. Last week the Spanish government declared a state of alarm for 15 days, evoking emergency powers in a bid to curb the rapid spread of the disease, which has already killed more than a thousand people and infected nearly 20,000, making Spain one of the worst-hit countries in the world. Under the emergency rules, all citizens have been ordered to stay at home except for essential business, such as buying groceries or going to work if telecommuting is not possible. Violators face fines and more than 100 people have been arrested for disobeying the lockdown, according to law-enforcement agencies. But Torra seemed to suggest that the nationwide confinement orders had not been implemented in Catalonia. “We believe that only if we confine ourselves at home, if we stay at home, if we take care of ourselves, this fight against the coronavirus can be won,” he said, noting that the central government is opting to keep open airports and ports, “and we think that this is not the best solution.” Asked about the measures that the Catalan government is adopting against the health crisis, Torra told the BBC interviewer that their powers have been centralized and as a result, the Catalan government is less able to “help our people.” Torra’s remarks alluded to the fact that the Catalan government wants to enforce even stricter restrictions and prevent people from leaving their homes even for work-related reasons. The regional government also wants to cut off access to Catalonia by land, sea and air. On Friday of last week, Torra called for the entire region to be isolated, and requested help from Madrid to do so. In the BBC interview, Torra lamented that the central government thinks “it is preferable to maintain open airports and ports.” The Catalan government does not have the powers to close the border with France or major infrastructure such as airports and train stations. A spokesman for El Prat airport in Barcelona said that there were 278 departures and arrivals on Thursday, around 30% of the usual volume. Most of the flights were bringing Spaniards home or taking foreigners back to their countries as part of ongoing repatriation efforts. On Friday, a European Commission spokesperson said that it is up to member states to decide what measures must be taken against the coronavirus in their own regions, in observance of their Constitution. Also on Friday, Spain’s Interior Minister Fernando Grande-Marlaska asked Torra for “a bare minimum amount of institutional loyalty and cooperation” to guarantee public health during this crisis. And Defense Minister Margarita Robles said in an interview on the state radio RNE that “not everything goes,” and that Torra was disqualifying himself by “misrepresenting the truth.” English version by Susana Urra.']